Habits guide consumer behavior like powerful gyroscopes. What products customers use and where they obtain them, what media they consume, and what apps they activate to get jobs done are driven more by unconscious habits than conscious choice. This is best understood as behavioral inertia—­the more habitual the behavior, the harder it is to change, and the more difficult it is for customers to explain. And it is habitual customer behavior that often thwarts the best-laid plans of marketers.

To understand consumer behavior through a habit lens requires breaking habits into their constituent parts. We operationalize customer behavior using Clayton Christensen’s framework of ‘jobs to be done.’ Customers do not buy products as much as they rent them to do a particular job. Habits are the process by which people efficiently automate their repeated jobs-to-be-done. For example, to get to work you might use a bus, a subway, your car, a Taxi, or Uber. Deviations in weather, whether or not you’re running late, or the clothes you are wearing might alter which you choose. If any of those conditions are encountered repeatedly, that behavior can become habitual under those conditions.

Habits are the most efficient form of human behavior, because, once formed they require no executive-mind effort. For consumers this means that repeated shopping and usage behaviors are automatically converted into habits.

Customer habits form predictably when these five things occur.

1. A job to be done is repeated…
2. In a similar situation (location, time of day, day of week, etc.) …
3. Where a reliable cue is associated with the job to be done…
4. Reinforcing feedback occurs in connection with that behavior… or
5. When a behavior belief forms either to bridge gaps in time between behavior and reinforcement or when feedback is mixed or non-existent.

The implications that unconscious drivers heavily influence customer behavior are profound because marketing assumptions are based on the idea that customers make rational and conscious choices. Most of our beliefs about how we make such choices are based on a flawed model of how the brain works. Theories of buyer behavior, consumer choice, and customer satisfaction all rely on the idea that the conscious mind possesses almost complete knowledge of what we do and why we do it. There is also an assumption that our memories are accurate records of past events, as if the brain stores information on a hard drive. But like a navigator using bad charts, these mental models have led marketers far astray for decades.

The Influence of Habits

When customers encounter novel situations, they solve them using a combination of conscious and unconscious mental processes, which we refer to as Pilot behavior. When positive feedback occurs that reinforces the way the consumer solved that job-to-be-done, it creates the first step in the habit formation process. It cannot be overstated how important unconsciously processed feedback is to this process. Just as the information processed emotionally is often more important than what is consciously remembered about an ad, unconscious learning from behavior à feedback determines if that behavior begins to become habitual.

Though solving the problem initially was purposeful and goal directed, with sufficient repetitions the behavior becomes automatic and no longer connected to goals or intentions, which we term autopilot behavior. When a habit forms, that job-to-done operates on autopilot where a cue triggers the behavior. And this is where conventional theories of consumer behavior break down. Customers often aren’t consciously choosing between brands, or evaluating product performance, or making satisfaction judgements. Most market research elicits conscious level responses only, unless they incorporate neuromarketing or biometric technology. And even then, the habitual processes are largely invisible to researchers.

The reality is that most shopping behavior is the results of automatically executed scripts that have been encoded in the unconscious, habitual mind. Though consumers often have little idea why they made a purchase, they assume their actions were conscious. So, when asked, they figure they must have had a reason and craft what seems to be a logical answer to explain their behavior to the research, as well as to themselves. Marketers diligently collect this data and use it to create advertising messages, distribution strategies, and to design new products. Which is why most marketing campaigns underperform expectations, and 85% of new products fail.

But what is really going on inside the customer’s brain? How is it possible that the vast majority of behavior is not initiated by conscious consideration, but is instead the result of unconscious routines? The brain uses 20% of the body’s energy, and conscious level effort increases the energy expenditure. So, any behaviors that can be relegated to the habitual mind will not increase energy usage. The LLE explains the essential value of habit formation. And a quick look at the number of products, services, apps, websites, stores, shops, movies, plays, books, magazines, and restaurants easily explains why habits are essential of efficiently live in the modern world.

In the context of Quick commerce, users use the platform for convenience and speed of getting discounted items at their home. This behaviour deeply reflects in the choices they make on platform. Highly impulsive people will lean towards smaller product categories like snacks, beverages, instant food. The people who need convenience in their day to day lives and are busy will order products that meet their daily needs and household consumables. Majority of purchases in Quick Commerce comes from Fast Moving Consumer Goods, whether the products are fresh produce, daily consumables, snacks, beverages, groceries or consumer staples, household items, fast fashion   at the convenience from their homes. Although Quick commerce's fundamental concept is based on buying Fast Moving Consumer Goods, but recent trends indicate that it is performing well on other item categories as well such as electronics, appliances, accessories, fashion & lifestyle. Shifting the platform from buying perspective to shopping perspective, which is more experiential in nature and requires users to engage in discovery rather than making quick purchases based on needs and impulses. 

To cater these needs of extending categories of products, larger dark stores are required which can store massive number of product SKUs as compared to current majority dark micro-fulfilment stores which can store 5000 to 8000 SKUs. In the present scenario Quick commerce platforms in India have built larger fulfilment stores called as megapods. These megapods are capable of storing up to 50000 SKUs. But some of the Quick Commerce platform relies on strengthening their density in smaller store. Only time can unfold, which infrastructure serves better for the customers. 