Users generally try new products based on different needs. Some users buy from different categories when they change their lifestyle such as joining gym, starting gardening, adopting pet or when they become conscious about their body etc. or have some kind of social influence from peers about trending electronics gadgets and accessories, fashion.

Before trying a new product user need to know does this product solves the problem they are in or do they want this product in their lives. They are more likely to try a product when they can see clear outcome what they are getting from product, is it solving their current problem or is it improving their lifestyle. The new product will lie in one of the two classification "need" or "want". Need based product will be chosen by people who are looking to get ultimate value from the product where as want based product will suit the users who want to upgrade their status or lifestyle.

How can we help users to convince to try new categories?

As the Quick Commerce platforms are highly visual, people mostly relies on pictures. These pictures should conclude the gist of the category and tell us about the functional knowledge of the category and what problem is it solving in the particular moment. Such as on Rakhi festival we see a banner of perfumes, and has written description "Gift for Sisters". This banner clearly define why should we buy the product from this category at this point of time, which helps in empowering the users to select a new category according to their current requirements. Helping in removing friction, building trust and further contributing to positive overall experience they get from the platform. 

A simple approach of giving them functional information of the new category on the right time will improve the awareness stage of the marketing funnel. This approach will help users to experience shopping on an emotional level. The users who connects on emotional levels goes far beyond one time purchasers and regular customer, being the active customers of the platform who further becomes loyalists. The brand loyalists helps in further promoting the brand using word-of-mouth. One of the most promising factors to gain organic customers which have high conversion rates as compared to other methods. These customers goes long way with the brand.